Hello. On this week we will talk about detectors in the high energy physics.
We'll view several detector designs and
consider different detector systems or subdetectors.
We will see how these systems work and what particle parameters they measure.
We'll learn how detectors recognize particles,
measure their energy and momentum,
and how they estimate particle types.
Also, we will see several cases in
high energy physics where machine learning can be successfully applied.
At the end of this week,
you'll know how detectors work and what systems they have and what data they produce.
And we start this week from a simple particle decay.
Consider a particle D_0 that decays into two other particles: a pion and a kaon.
In this example, D_0 is also called as mother particle,
and the kaon and the pion are called as daughter particles.
Each of these particles has certain energy, momentum and mass.
Energy and momentum of a particle are determined by speed of this particle.
Mass of the particle is defined by its type.
In this case, in this example,
we have three particle types:
D_0, pion and kaon.
All pions have the same mass and its value is different from kaon mass, for an example.
From the energy conservation law, we know that,
energy of the mother particle D_0 is equal to the sum of the kaon and the pion energies.
And from the momentum conservation law,
we know that momentum of D_0 particle is
equal to the vector sum of the kaon and the pion momentums.
Also, we know that energy, momentum,
and mass of a particle are connected by the equation shown on the slide.
These equations allow to estimate mass of
the mother particle D_0 using masses of the daughter particle's,
their energy and momentum values.
Also, this expression requires an angle between the kaon and the pion trajectories.
However, the daughter particle trajectories
are needed not only to measure the angle between them,
but also to check that these particles,
kaon and pion in our case,
originate from the same point,
from the same particle.
It becomes more important when we have several decays at the same time.
Detectors in high energy physics and
their different systems are needed to estimate a particle trajectory,
momentum, energy, and its type to be able to
recognize particle decays and to reconstruct parameters of mother particles.
In this example, it's mass.
On this week, we'll talk about different systems of
detectors in high energy physics experiments.
The systems or subdetectors are tracking system,
ring-imaging Cherenkov detector,
electromagnetic and hadronic calorimeters, and muon chambers.
Tracking system recognizes a particle trajectory or track,
estimates parameters of this trajectory,
and measures the particle momentum.
The ring-imaging Cherenkov detector estimates
a particle type using its momentum measured in the tracking system.
Electromagnetic and hadron calorimeters measure particle energy
and muon chambers recognize muons and also estimate their energy.
This week, we'll talk about how all these systems work and how they
recognize particle trajectories and measure their energy and momentum values.
Also, we'll talk about the particle identification.
The goal of the particle identification or PID is to identify
a type of a particle associated with a track using responses from different systems.
Particle types are electron,
proton, muon, kaon and pion.
We will consider several machine learning approaches that
help to identify a particle type with high quality.
Moreover, we see how to provide
independence of this quality from the particle momentum or other parameters.
Consider several detector example on Large Hadron Collider at CERN.
There are four major experiments at CERN.
These experiments are LHCb,
ATLAS, ALICE and CMS.
From the previous week,
you know that Large Hadron Collider has
two beams of protons that fly in opposite directions.
Each of these beams are divided into bunches.
Each bunch has about 10 in 11 protons.
Bunches of the beams cross each other inside the detectors.
And there are several proton-proton collisions
are generated inside the detector during the bunch crossing.
The proton-proton collisions produce a lot of
other particles that decay into other particles and so on.
The detectors recognize these particles,
estimates their types, and measures their energies and momentum.
Each bunch crossing with all generated particles is called an event.
There're 40 millions events per seconds generated on Large Hadron Collider at CERN.
Consider several event examples.
Let's consider the LHCb detector example shown on the slide.
LHCb is a single-arm forward spectrometer
which registers particles flying in one direction.
LHCb detects about 100 particles in
an event producing by a proton-proton collision in the Large Hadron Collider.
Trajectories of these particles and their responses in
different detector systems are shown in the figure.
Tracking system responses are shown as magenta and blue lights.
Blue and orange cells represent
calorimeter responses and green cells correspond to muon chambers.
Follow the link on this slide you will find
an interactive 3D model of the LHCb detector where you can look at these events.
In the next video, we will look closer at each of these detector systems.
The second example is the ATLAS detector.
It has a cylindrical shape and registers particles in all directions.
Each event has about 1000 particles from a proton-proton collision in the collider.
The detector provides high precision of
the particles detection and it's
able to recognize decays with a lot of daughter particles.
Example of such a decay is shown in the lower left corner of the slide.
In the next video,
we'll consider tracking system of a detector in high energy physics.
We will see how it recognizes this particles trajectories and estimates their momentum.